JUDY WOODRUFF: A leading
Republican in the U.S. House
lies critically wounded tonight.
The Illinois man who shot him,
along with a police officer,
a congressional staffer,
and a lobbyist, has died.
They came together in a
fusillade of bullets and
bloodshed early today,
just outside Washington.
Our Lisa Desjardins
begins our coverage.
(GUNFIRE)
LISA DESJARDINS: For at least
five minutes, gunshots crackled
across the Northern Virginia
baseball field where
Republican members of
Congress were practicing.
Cell phone video shared with the
"NewsHour" captured a harrowing
scene of a gunfight between
the attacker and Capitol Police.
MAN: Hey.
Is that guy OK out there?
Has that guy been shot?
Is he OK?
Is anybody talking to him?
LISA DESJARDINS: The man who
shot the video, Noah Nathan,
had been out walking his dogs.
NOAH NATHAN, Eyewitness: I saw
the congressional players, and,
you know, they're a regular
here practicing in the morning.
And then I heard -- I
thought it was fireworks.
And then I heard another
one and realized, OK,
maybe that's not fireworks.
It's gunfire.
And then people started
scattering, and then
there was more shots
and you could hear them
skimming off the gravel
and hitting the fence.
And it was a helpless feeling.
I couldn't do anything.
LISA DESJARDINS: As lawmakers
jumped over fences, seeking
cover, House Majority Whip
Steve Scalise was
shot in the hip.
Alabama Congressman
Mo Brooks saw it all.
REP.
MO BROOKS (R), Alabama: It's
the feeling of helplessness,
when you have got a baseball
bat and a guy's got a rifle.
And you see your friends,
Steve Scalise in particular,
lying on the ground, dragging
himself from the infield dirt
to the outfield grass, and
there was nothing we could do to
help him.
LISA DESJARDINS: Georgia
Congressman Barry Loudermilk
says it wasn't a random attack.
REP.
BARRY LOUDERMILK (R), Georgia:
There were civilians out there.
There were people walking their
dogs, laying on the ground
screaming and crying, but he
wasn't targeting them.
He was shooting at us.
LISA DESJARDINS: Joe Barton
of Texas had taken his
young sons to the practice.
REP.
JOE BARTON (R), Texas: We got
some of us were in the dugout,
some of us were on the ground.
I was behind the dugout.
My son Jack got under an SUV.
And he was very brave.
My other son Brad was
in the batting cage and
he also was very brave.
LISA DESJARDINS: In the video,
you can hear people shouting
for police to shoot the gunman.
MAN: Shoot him!
LISA DESJARDINS:
Again, Mo Brooks:
REP.
MO BROOKS: The bravery that
they displayed, taking on a
guy with the rifle while they
have pistols, shooting from
long distance, and if they
had not been successful, then
the tragedy here would have
undoubtedly been much greater,
because those of us who were
in the first base dugout,
we'd of had no chance.
LISA DESJARDINS:
First-responders were on
the scene in minutes.
Some victims were airlifted
to hospitals by helicopter.
Scalise underwent surgery and
was in critical condition.
The suspected shooter was
also taken to the hospital,
where he died of his wounds.
Police identified him as
66-year-old James Hodgkinson
of Belleville, Illinois.
TIMOTHY SLATER, FBI: Law
enforcement has reason to
believe that the shooter
has been in Alexandria,
Virginia, area since
March of this year.
The FBI has issued again
a seeking information
poster that is located
on our Web site asking
the public to come forward with
information on the shooter.
LISA DESJARDINS: Florida
Congressman Ron DeSantis
believes he talked with
Hodgkinson just before
the shooting.
REP.
RON DESANTIS (R), Florida: An
unidentified individual walked
up to the car, asked Congressman
Duncan, who was in the front
passenger seat, whether they
were Republicans or Democrats
in the field.
It was a little bit abrasive.
It was something that kind of
struck me as odd, not odd to
the extent I thought he was
going to go shoot people.
LISA DESJARDINS: Already,
a picture has begun to
emerge of Hodgkinson.
A Facebook page of the same
name is filled with anti-Trump
posts, and Hodgkinson apparently
volunteered for Bernie
Sanders' presidential campaign.
The Vermont senator today
condemned the shooting
on the Senate floor.
SEN.
BERNIE SANDERS (I),
Vermont: I am sickened
by this despicable act.
And let me be as
clear as I can be.
Violence of any kind is
unacceptable in our society.
And I condemn this action in
the strongest possible terms.
LISA DESJARDINS: There is a
contrast between the location
of this shooting, a neighborhood
that is known for putting up
signs of welcome and opposing
hate, and this act of violence
that some say may symbolize
rising anger in America.
At the scene, Virginia Governor
Terry McAuliffe specifically
pointed to politics.
GOV.
TERRY MCAULIFFE (D), Virginia:
What you saw in the last
presidential campaign, there's
just a lot of dug-in hard
feelings out there that
exist in this country today.
I do think our country
has become way too divided
between red and blue.
LISA DESJARDINS: President
Trump echoed the cry for unity
at the White House hours after
the shooting.
DONALD TRUMP, President of the
United States: We may have our
differences, but we do well
in times like these to remember
that everyone who serves in
our nation's capital is here
because, above all,
they love our country.
LISA DESJARDINS: The House
canceled votes for the day,
but shaken lawmakers, Democrats
and Republicans alike,
gathered on the House floor
in a show of solidarity.
REP.
PAUL RYAN (R-WI), Speaker
of the House: We are united.
We are united in our shock,
we are united in our anguish.
An attack on one of us is
an attack on all of us.
(APPLAUSE)
REP.
NANCY PELOSI (D-CA),
House Minority Leader:
We cannot let that be a
victory for the assailant
or anyone who would
think that way.
So, tomorrow, we will
go out on the field.
We will root for our team.
We want everyone to do
his or her very best.
And we will use this occasion
as one that brings us together
and not separates us further.
LISA DESJARDINS: An
update on conditions.
Congressman Scalise and one
other staffer who was shot
are in critical condition.
The others injured
today, we're told, are in
good or fair condition.
And, also, about that baseball
game, it is scheduled to be,
as planned, tomorrow night.
They are not canceling.
And Judy, they're adding
another charity cause,
the Fallen Officers Fund.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa, are
there changes in security as
a result of what happened?
LISA DESJARDINS: I
think the answer to
that, Judy, is not yet.
Here, of course, the Capitol
is a highly secure building.
There's no changes here.
No one said there
need to be changes.
But there is a real
question about these
events where many members
of Congress gather in one
place.
Congressman Scalise's security
detail was there today, as
well as one other Capitol
police officer because so
many congressmen were present.
They're wondering if there
need to be more of a police
presence when there are not just
leaders, but any members
of Congress gathered
in one place like that.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And, Lisa,
you're at that Capitol Building
every day, practically.
How are people
dealing with this?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think the
mood today, Judy, is sober.
It's not highly emotional, but
it's one where they are taking
very serious stock of where
we are as a nation and where
people are in terms of how
they look at their leaders and
how they look at violence.
I think there's also a lot of
questions today about whether
political rhetoric has, indeed,
gone too far, and whether the
divides that affect the votes
on the House and Senate floor
are reverberating back and
forth with public divides now
rising into anger and violence.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa
Desjardins, who covers the
Capitol every day for us.
Lisa, you have been on this
story all day from the moment
you heard about it this morning.
Thank you very much.
LISA DESJARDINS: My pleasure.